Add notes for n25038 (#620)
bitcoin-core-review-club/website: _posts/2023-02-22-#25038.md

will refer to Bitcoin Core's rules (not [BIP125](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0125.mediawiki)'s
rules) by number.

**Package CPFP** describes a policy enabling a child transaction to pay for a parent transaction when submitted together
as a package, even if the parent does not meet all fee requirements on its own.  Package CPFP was discussed in a
[previous review club meeting](/24152).

**Package RBF** desribes a policy that additionally enables a child to pay for replacing transactions its parent
conflicts with when they are submitted as a package. The main use case of Package RBF is to allow LN channel commitment
transactions (which conflict with each other but whose fees cannot be changed) to replace each other in mempools using
fees added at broadcast time.

A **Pinning Attack** is a type of transaction relay censorship in which the attacker takes advantage of mempool policy
to prevent a transaction from being mined or entering a mempool. An introduction to mempool policy and pinning attacks
is transcribed
[here](https://btctranscripts.com/adopting-bitcoin/2021/2021-11-16-gloria-zhao-transaction-relay-policy/#mempool-policy).

> A "v3" transaction has its `nVersion` field set to 3. These types of transactions are nonstandard in Bitcoin Core today.

Reviewer: You're right, BIP68 is not directly applicable to the PR but I remember when first read the v3 proposal that I wasn't quite sure what transaction versioning was, so I just wanted to add a bit more context here.

The package RBF commits include
[58e811e](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/58e811ecb1e1977422ecda2af62460e8efc057be)...[c27864f](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/c27864fbca2421eeb64f13a803f7b4393999e1cf).

### Motivation

The high-level goal is to make competition for block space a purely fee-based market. More
specifically, if two parties are trying to get their conflicting transactions confirmed, the one
broadcasts transactions that are more profitable to mine should win, not the one who
broadcasts first or adds some specially-crafted, low-fee garbage transactions. Here are some of the
worst RBF limitations today:

- Pinning through absolute fee rules (aka ["Rule 3"](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/policy/mempool-replacements.md#current-replace-by-fee-policy)
or "Rule 4" Pinning): RBF rules require the replacement transaction pay a higher absolute fee than the aggregate fees paid
by all original transactions. This rule seems to be the [most
headache-causing](https://gist.github.com/instagibbs/b3095752d6289ab52166c04df55c1c19#bip125-rule3).

> 	- Suppose Alice and Mallory have presigned transactions A and B, respectively, which conflict with one another

Author: Changed all

	  (e.g. commitment transactions for an LN channel together). Mallory broadcasts B first and can increase the
	fees required for Alice to replace B by:

> 		(1) Attaching transaction(s) that descend from B and pay a feerate too low to fee-bump B through

Reviewer: Oh yeah absolutely. I'm not very familiar with pinning attacks but I thought this was mostly applicable in a high-fee environment where it's not unreasonable to expect a low-fee tx to get purged after 2 weeks, making the attack asymmetric. But I'll mark as resolved, not familiar enough with it.

		   CPFP. For example, assuming the default descendant size limit is 101KvB and B is 1000vB paying a
		feerate of 2sat/vB, adding a 100KvB, 2sat/vB child increases the cost to replace B by 200Ksat.

		(2) Adding a high-fee descendant of B that also spends from a large, low-feerate mempool transaction,
		   C. The child may pay a very large fee but not actually be fee-bumping B if its overall ancestor
		feerate is still lower than B's individual feerate. For example, assuming the default ancestor size
		limit is 101KvB, B is 1000vB paying 2sat/vB, and C is 99KvB paying 1sat/vB, adding a 1000vB child of
		B and C increases the cost to replace B by 101Ksat.

- Pinning through package limits: All transactions admitted to the mempool must stay within package limits; no ancestor

>   set or descendant set may exceed 25 transactions. Additionally, Rule 5 requires a replacement cause the eviction of

Author: At the very top of the notes I say "these notes will refer to RBF rules by number" and this section is about RBF limitations so just leaving as is

> more than 100 entries.

Author: Yes thank you

	  package limit, it is possible to reach the Rule 5 limit.

- No increase in incentive compatibility required: Theoretically any replacement transaction should
  confirm faster than the one it replaced; a rational user would not intentionally pay more fees to
have their transaction confirm later. However, there is currently no rule to enforce this. As a
result, all transactions signed with SIGHASH\_ANYONECANPAY are vulnerable to being replaced by a transaction
that will confirm later than the original.

	- [Rule 6](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/policy/mempool-replacements.md#current-replace-by-fee-policy)
	was originally enforcing this, as the "incentive compatibility score" was previously just the
	feerate of the transaction. However, with the current ancestor set-based selection algorithm and
	possible package topologies, this is difficult to precisely calculate short of building a block
	template.

	- We have discussed the difficulty of calculating "miner score" in a [previous review club meeting](/26152).
	Also see discussion in [#23121](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/23121) and
	[#26451](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/26451).

> - Descendants of BIP125 signaling transactions cannot be directly replaced: Any descendant of an

Reviewer: > Descendants of BIP125 signaling transactions cannot be directly replaced:

I think you mean to say that they can't be directly replaced if they don't signal for RBF? Currently, it reads as if they can't be replaced at all.

Author: Blehhh, hard to word, got dizzy just trying to write it :joy: Hopefully clearer now

	* [RBF Pinning with Counterparties and Competing Interest](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2020-April/002639.html)
	* [Pinning : The Good, The Bad, The Ugly](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2020-June/002758.html)
	* [T-bast's Pinning Attacks Document](https://github.com/t-bast/lightning-docs/blob/master/pinning-attacks.md)
	* [Eltoo Pinning](https://gist.github.com/instagibbs/60264606e181451e977e439a49f69fe1)

A larger list of RBF limitations was discussed last year on [this mailing list
post](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2022-January/019817.html) and
[gist](https://gist.github.com/glozow/25d9662c52453bd08b4b4b1d3783b9ff). Various proposals to amend or rewrite RBF
policy were discussed on those threads. The discussions resulted in this v3 proposal to address most issues. Additional
RBF improvements (which do not conflict with v3) are also being considered.

### V3 Policy

The philosophy behind [v3](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/version-3-transaction-relay/) is that RBF limitations stem

> from current mempool policy being too permissive in the possible package topologies it accepts. [Package

Reviewer: I'm not sure the definition of "package topologies" is widely known - and as such probably why it's problematic may not be clear?

Author: Rearranged so hopefully it's clear now

limits](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/policy/mempool-limits.md) exist to limit the worst-case
computational complexity of mempool operations such as block template assembly and new transaction validation. However,

> current limits still allow huge clusters of thousands of transactions.

Reviewer: I think it's useful to (re-)specify that we're talking about mempool operations - not packages/replacements.

> <!-- FIXME: add photo -->

Reviewer: Note: still needs adding

Author: Added now, was hunting for it earlier

> With these possible transaction graphs, it isn't feasible to add a comparison of incentive compatibility scores, as

Reviewer: "add" where? I think this needs a bit more context.

calculating them could involve iterating through the entire mempool. Permissive package limits are also what makes Rule
3 pinning possible; when two counterparties share a transaction, they are both able to bring in descendants and other
transactions to influence the incentive compatibility of their shared transaction.

On the other hand, most protocols involving untrusted counterparties don't require complex transaction graphs. Usually,

> a 1-parent-1-child package is sufficient: the presigned transaction plus a child attaching fees at broadcast time.

Reviewer: I think this needs more highlighting that a core principle of V3 is about _reducing_ options: radically limit the topology and complexity of packages/descendants so that it becomes much easier to reason about all possible scenarios and people _can_ use it if they want to

Author: "The philosophy behind v3 is that RBF limitations stem from current mempool policy being too permissive in the possible package topologies it accepts." ?

> V3 rules are as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
V3 rules (see [docs](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/blob/7198dac47279967be1a5d97c5423df60ff3b7df5/doc/policy/version3_transactions.md#version-3-rules) for rationale) are as follows:
```

> - A v3 transaction signals replaceability, even if it does not signal BIP125 replaceability.

Reviewer: nitty-nit: `s/v3/V3/` (or vice versa)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A v3 transaction is always replaceable, it does not need to signal BIP125 replaceability.
```

Author: This should be a copy-paste of the v3 rules in the doc so leaving as is

- Any descendant of an unconfirmed V3 transaction must also be V3.
- A V3 transaction's unconfirmed ancestors must all be V3.
- A V3 transaction cannot have more than 1 unconfirmed descendant.
- A V3 transaction that has an unconfirmed V3 ancestor cannot be larger than 1000 virtual bytes.
- A V3 transaction cannot have more than 1 unconfirmed ancestor.

Notice a few nice properties of v3 packages and transactions (from most obvious to least obvious):
- A v3 transaction in mempool cannot have more than 1 descendant.
- A v3 transaction in mempool cannot have more than 1 ancestor.
- When a v3 transaction is being replaced, it has at most 1 descendant. That descendant adds no more than 1000vB to what needs to be evicted.
- When the descendant of a v3 transaction is being replaced, there must be exactly 1 replacement transaction and 1 to-be-replaced transaction.

> - When a v3 transaction is being replaced, it is the sponsor of either 0 or 1 0-fee parents.

Reviewer: It just seems like a more specific case of "cannot have more than 1 ancestor", but I'm not sure why the 0-fee use case is so important here?

Reviewer: I was mostly confused by the "0-fee", because you could essentially copy/paste that sentence replacing 0 (in "0-fee") with any number and it would still be true. If I understand your intent correctly, how about:

```suggestion
- When a v3 transaction is being replaced, it is the sponsor of either 0 or 1 (but never more than that) parents that would fall below the minimum feerate without the child sponsoring it.
```

- There is no difference between a v3 transaction having "explicit" and "inherited" replaceability signaling.

> - The incentive compatibility score of a transaction is equal to the minimum between its ancestor feerate and individual feerate.

Reviewer: Since we haven't defined ancestor feerate, perhaps useful to inline this?
```suggestion
- The incentive compatibility score of a transaction is equal to the minimum between its ancestor (combined) feerate and individual feerate.
```

> - When the descendant of a v3 transaction is being replaced, its descendant count does not change, and its descendant size changes by the difference between the replacement and to-be-replaced transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the descendant of a parent v3 transaction is being replaced, the parent's descendant count does not change, and its descendant size changes by the difference between the replacement and to-be-replaced transactions.
```

1. What is the difference between a transaction that "explicitly" signals BIP125 and one that "inherits" BIP125
   signaling? Why is it impossible for a v3 transaction to be one but not the other?

1. Why should there be a rule to check whether a replacement transation is more incentive compatible to mine?

1. Is min(package feerate, individual feerate) an accurate incentive compatibility score for v3 transactions? What
   about in general? (See `CheckMinerScores()` [implementation](https://github.com/bitcoin-core-review-club/bitcoin/commit/58e811ecb1e1977422ecda2af62460e8efc057be)).

1. Imagine that we *really* need a transaction txA to confirm immediately, but a malicious counterparty has broadcast a conflicting
   transaction txB which is 2000vB, paying 10,000sat in fees (5sat/vB). Let's say we are ok with either txA or txB
confirming, as long as it's in the next block, and it's guaranteed (just pretend, ok?) that anything above 20sat/vB will
be mined immediately, while anything below 20sat/vB will not.  What fee can we put on our transaction to *guarantee*
that either txA or txB will reach a package feerate of 20sat/vB? (Hint: txA needs to replace txB and any descendants it

> may have.  What is the maximum fee the counterparty can attach to descendants of txB without bumping it to 20sat/vB?)

Reviewer: I'm quite confused by this question. First you say that 
> Imagine that we *really* need a transaction txA to confirm immediately

but then next sentence is
> Let's say we are ok with either txA or txB confirming

Those seem conflicting?

And then
> What fee can we put on our transaction to *guarantee* that either txA or txB will reach a package feerate of 20sat/vB?

seems to steer towards TxB affecting the package feerate of TxA, but since this (how I read the question) is RBF and not CPFP I think that's confusing? 

Finally - I think it needs specifying if this is in a v2 or v3 world?

Author: Clarified

1. If all mining nodes on the network are running with this v3 policy, while none of the non-mining nodes are, what happens?

1. If 10% of nodes on the network are running with this v3 policy, while we haven't upgraded our node yet, what happens?
   What about 99% of nodes?

1. If we were running a business that accepted unconfirmed transactions as payments, what changes should we make so that our wallet correctly tracks v3 transactions?

> 1. Who might be interested in using v3 transactions? Who probably wouldn't be interested? If there are some wallets/uers/applications that use v3 while others don't, is there a fingerprinting issue?

Reviewer: Would add privacy - not sure everyone is familiar with the term
```suggestion
1. Who might be interested in using v3 transactions? Who probably wouldn't be interested? If there are some wallets/uers/applications that use v3 while others don't, is there a (privacy) fingerprinting issue?
```

Author: Expanded what I mean by fingerprinting

> 1. After the addition of v3, all non-v3 transactions are subject to the limitations and pinning attacks. Wouldn't it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. After the addition of v3, all non-v3 transactions are still subject to the existing limitations and pinning attacks. Wouldn't it
```

	- Now imagine txA and txB are both v3 transactions. What fee can we put on txA to guarantee that either txA or txB will
	  reach a package feerate of 20sat/vB? (Hint: in the v3 world, txA cannot have more than 1000vB of descendants).

1. If all mining nodes on the network are running with this v3 policy, while none of the non-mining nodes are, what happens?

1. If 10% of nodes on the network are running with this v3 policy, while we haven't upgraded our node yet, what happens?
   What about 99% of nodes?

1. If we were running a business that accepted unconfirmed transactions as payments, what changes should we make so that our wallet correctly tracks v3 transactions?

1. Who might be interested in using v3 transactions? Who probably wouldn't be interested?

1. If there are some wallets/users/applications that use v3 while others don't, is there a privacy issue (i.e. people
   can fingerprint which wallet likely created a transaction by looking at its version)?

1. After the addition of v3, all non-v3 transactions are still subject to the existing limitations and pinning attacks.
   Wouldn't it be safer to enforce these rules for all transactions on the network?

> 1. V3 limits each transaction to 1 parent or 1 child (2 generations only), and perhaps that seems

Reviewer: I just realized - we never explicitly specify "parent" or "child" to refer to _unconfirmed_ transactions only, and I think that may be confusing to some people. Could qualify it everywhere, or slap a big disclaimer at the beginning of the notes (and probably repeat for the Questions section)?
